Albert Einstein (1879-1955) was born at Ulm, in Wurttemberg, Germany. He received a diploma in 1901 from the Swiss Federal Polytechnic School in Zurich, where he studied physics and mathematics. After seeking in vain to acquire a teaching position, he worked as a technical assistant in the Swiss Patent Office in Bern, Switzerland. He received his doctorate in 1905, was appointed lecturer at Bern University in 1908, associate professor of theoretical physics at Zurich University in
1909, Prof. of Theoretical Physics at the German University of Prague in 1911, and Prof. of theoretical physics at the Federal Institute of Technology of Zurich in 1912.
After returning to Zurich, he went on to become the director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Physical Institute and Prof. at the University of Berlin. In 1933, he moved to the United States to become Prof. of Theoretical Physics at Princeton. He retired in 1945 and became a leading advocate for the creation of a single world-wide government with global jurisdiction. After the death of Chaim Weizmann, he was offered the presidency of the state of Israel by Prime Minister Ben Gurion in 1952, which he politely declined.
During his brief time at the Swiss patent office, Einstein published a number of ground-breaking theoretical articles on the subjects of Brownian motion, electromagnetic radiation, the photoelectric effect, the principle of relativity, and the
equivalence of mass and energy. Although Einstein was later awarded a Nobel Prize in physics for his viewpoint concerning the photoelectric effect, his name is most often associated with his theory of relativity. Einstein describes this theory as a logically rigid and astoundingly simple combination and generalization of earlier work by men such as Newton, Maxwell, Mach, Lorentz, and Poincare. In order to reconcile Maxwell’s theory of light with Newton’s theory of motion, Einstein introduced a connection between the space and time coordinates of events observed from different, but non-accelerating, frames of reference. This special theory of relativity was based essentially on the assumption that the speed of light is independent of the speed of its source relative to the observer. With the 1916 publication of his general theory of relativity, Einstein expanded his previous work to account for observations
made from accelerating frames of reference. These considerations led to a complete reconceptualization of the relationship between mass, gravity, space and time.
A Student’s Guide Through the Great Physics Texts, Springer.
